---
title: 'Blog 2: Crafting Arguments'
date: 2025-09-21
permalink: /posts/2025/09/blog-post-2/
tags:
  - Recruitment
  - AI
  - LLMs
  - Human Resources
---

Companies are increasingly using AI to hire new employees. AI that is not properly trained can carry on biases and have a negative impact into the company retention of its employees.

**News Article:**  
[When Your Job Interviewer Isn’t Human](https://time.com/7306955/ai-job-interview-recruitment/)

In today's blog, I will be presenting an article that discusses the use of AI during the recruitment process of employees. The article basically argues that if companies keep using AI during the interview process, they could later struggle with retaining employees who did not get a proper introduction into the company culture.

**Argument**

The article states that jobseekers would rather talk to a human than a robot to experience that human connection. Furthermore, the article asserts that the AI experience is alienating and often biased. Finally, it concludes that using AI is bad because it can affect employees retention since they are not properly introduced to the company culture.

**Rebuttal**

In supporting the use of AI for tasks like recruitment, the following points can be made to show how AI can improve to make the recruitment process more human like. Firstly, AIs are getting increasingly sophisticated to mimic human speech and behavior so to feel the human connection does not necessarily require talking to a human. There is a hasty generalization in the first premise of the article. If only one person had a non-human like experience with an AI in an interview, it does not necessarily lead to all AI being done with in the recruitment process. Furthermore, the AI bias is largely due to the fact that the AI used is a general LLM that was trained on random internet data rather than on specific company data. In conclusion, using AI is not inherently bad but using general Large Language Models without training it on the right data is.

**Alternative Argument**

LLMs are not mature yet to be used during the recruitment process. They hallucinate hence can straight up tell lies, which makes them not suitable for making big decisions like who gets hired for a certain position.

**Recommendation for AI use**

Instead of getting to engage with interviewees, AIs would rather be used for tedious tasks like finding key words in resumes. They are pretty accurate with the former and then an actual human can get to do the interviewing and make the final decision on if somebody is suitable for a position or not.

**Reflection**

This blog has helped me to realize how all AI is not bad and that there are certain tasks it is good at and others that it has not mastered yet. This realization is different from my previous misconception that AI should not be used at all for tasks that involve human decision. Now I am drawn to think that it can definitely be used for the tasks it is good at, like going through documents, and then leave the rest to human experts.